A fitting tribute to the 30th anniversary of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident, Ukrainian photographer Alina Rudya returned to the deserted area to photograph former residents in the homes they left behind.

Rudya was only one year old when Reactor 4 at a nuclear plant in Chernobyl, Ukraine, had a meltdown, spewing radioactive fallout and forcing residents in the nearby towns to evacuate to safety. Considered one of the world’s worst civilian nuclear accidents, the explosion continues to have long lasting effects on the surrounding areas and its former inhabitants.

“My father was an engineer at the Chernobyl plant,” Rudya told EyeEm in an interview. “In fact, he was working a night shift at the atomic plant on that very night. The catastrophe altered my parents’ lives drastically and radically - and mine too.”

She was first drawn back to the area, referred to as the Exclusion Zone, in 2011. She traveled there to revisit her roots in the town of Prypyat, which was built for families of the nuclear power plant employees, she told EyeEm.

“Chernobyl is a town I never knew and never will but, in many respects, all of my desires and passions sprung from its ruins. Many people I miss are gone because of it,” said Rudya, whose father died years ago due to health complications from his work in radioactive environments.

Her trips to the deserted town were initially about capturing her own past, however, her most recent trip focused on others. Her newly released book of photography, “Prypat Mon Amour” documents former residents’ re-immersion into their abandoned homes.

“Walking there with those who’d point to a piece of debris and tell me, ‘That’s where I used to buy ice cream,’ or ‘That’s where I went to watch the movies,’ that really struck a chord,” said Rudya. “One woman couldn’t believe her eyes when we entered the town. It was all woods.”

After completing this project, Rudya told EyeEm she doesn’t plan on returning to Prypyat anytime soon, but she would like to continue exploring the Exclusion Zone.

“There are still old people who lived in the abandoned villages around Chernobyl - they may not have too long left. I already took portraits of many of them and I would like to continue telling their unique stories,” said Rudya.